Lecanemab (Leqembi(r)) is approved in the United States for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD) to be initiated in early AD (mild cognitive impairment [MCI] due to AD or mild AD dementia) with confirmed brain amyloid pathology. Appropriate Use Recommendations (AURs) are intended to help guide the introduction of new therapies into real-world clinical practice. Community dwelling patients with AD differ from those participating in clinical trials. Administration of lecanemab at clinical trial sites by individuals experienced with monoclonal antibody therapy also differs from the community clinic-based administration of lecanemab. These AURs use clinical trial data as well as research and care information regarding AD to help clinicians administer lecanemab with optimal safety and opportunity for effectiveness. Safety and efficacy of lecanemab are known only for patients like those participating in the phase 2 and phase 3 lecanemab trials, and these AURs adhere closely to the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the trials. Adverse events may occur with lecanemab including amyloid related imaging abnormalities (ARIA) and infusion reactions. Monitoring guidelines for these events are detailed in this AUR. Most ARIA with lecanemab is asymptomatic, but a few cases are serious or, very rarely, fatal. Microhemorrhages and rare macrohemorrhages may occur in patients receiving lecanemab. Anticoagulation increases the risk of hemorrhage, and the AUR recommends that patients requiring anticoagulants not receive lecanemab until more data regarding this interaction are available. Patients who are apolipoprotein E e4 (APOE4) gene carriers, especially APOE4 homozygotes, are at higher risk for ARIA, and the AUR recommends APOE genotyping to better inform risk discussions with patients who are lecanemab candidates. Clinician and institutional preparedness are mandatory for use of lecanemab, and protocols for management of serious events should be developed and implemented. Communication between clinicians and therapy candidates or those on therapy is a key element of good clinical practice for the use of lecanemab. Patients and their care partners must understand the potential benefits, the potential harms, and the monitoring requirements for treatment with this agent. Culture-specific communication and building of trust between clinicians and patients are the foundation for successful use of lecanemab.
The dominant risk factors for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) are advanced age and the APOE4 genetic variant. To examine how these factors alter neuroimmune function, we generated an integrative, longitudinal single-cell atlas of brain immune cells in AD model mice bearing the three common human APOE alleles. Transcriptomic and chromatin accessibility analyses identified a reactive microglial population defined by the concomitant expression of inflammatory signals and cell-intrinsic stress markers whose frequency increased with age and APOE4 burden. An analogous population was detectable in the brains of human AD patients, including in the cortical tissue, using multiplexed spatial transcriptomics. This population, which we designate as terminally inflammatory microglia (TIM), exhibited defects in amyloid-b clearance and altered cell-cell communication during aducanumab treatment. TIM may represent an exhausted-like state for inflammatory microglia in the AD milieu that contributes to AD risk and pathology in APOE4 carriers and the elderly, thus presenting a potential therapeutic target for AD.
APOE e4 allele (ApoE4) is the primary genetic risk factor for sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD), expressed in 40-65% of all AD patients. ApoE4 has been associated to many pathological processes possibly linked to cognitive impairment, such as amyloid-b (Ab) and tau pathologies. However, the exact mechanism underlying ApoE4 impact on AD progression is unclear, while no effective therapies are available for this highly debilitating neurodegenerative disorder. This review describes the current knowledge of ApoE4 interaction with mitochondria, causing mitochondrial dysfunction and neurotoxicity, associated with increased mitochondrial Ca2+ and reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels, and it effects on mitochondrial dynamics, namely fusion and fission, and mitophagy. Moreover, ApoE4 translocates to the nucleus, regulating the expression of genes involved in aging, Ab production, inflammation and apoptosis, potentially linked to AD pathogenesis. Thus, novel therapeutical targets can be envisaged to counteract the effects induced by ApoE4 in AD brain.
APOE4 is the first identified genetic risk factor and remains as the strongest predictor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). Studies of AD patients, AD patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons and cerebral organoids, and human apoE4-expressing and apoE-deficient mouse models clearly demonstrate that apoE4 provokes neuroinflammation, impairs cerebrovasculature, and exacerbates amyloid and tau pathologies. ApoE expression is greatly up-regulated in disease-associated microglia in mouse models of amyloidosis and in human microglia from AD brains. Importantly, genetic knock-down or depletion of apoE in mice greatly attenuates neuroinflammation and alleviates amyloid and tau pathologies. Similar beneficial effects can be achieved when apoE reduction is induced by the overexpression of apoE metabolic receptor LDLR. Toward therapeutic implications, administration of apoE antisense oligonucleotides or apoE siRNAs leads to significant pharmacologic effects, i.e., significant alleviation of AD pathologies in mouse models. Therefore, apoE reduction represents a promising therapeutic strategy for the treatment of AD patients carrying the APOE e4 allele. In this review, we summarize evidence and rationale on why and how we target apoE4 reduction for AD therapy.
Meningeal lymphatic vessels (mLVs), the functional lymphatic system present in the meninges, are the key drainage route responsible for the clearance of molecules, immune cells, and cellular debris from the cerebrospinal fluid and interstitial fluid into deep cervical lymph nodes. Aging and ApoE4, the two most important risk factors for Alzheimer's disease (AD), induce mLV dysfunction, decrease cerebrospinal fluid influx and outflux, and exacerbate amyloid pathology and cognitive dysfunction. Dysfunction of mLVs results in the deposition of metabolic products, accelerates neuroinflammation, and promotes the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines in the brain. Thus, mLVs represent a novel therapeutic target for treating neurodegenerative and neuroinflammatory diseases. This review aims to summarize the structure and function of mLVs and to discuss the potential effect of aging and ApoE4 on mLV dysfunction, as well as their roles in the pathogenesis of AD.
This study aimed to evaluate the impact of APOE4 homozygosity on Alzheimer's disease (AD) by examining its clinical, pathological and biomarker changes to see whether APOE4 homozygotes constitute a distinct, genetically determined form of AD. Data from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center and five large cohorts with AD biomarkers were analyzed. The analysis included 3,297 individuals for the pathological study and 10,039 for the clinical study. Findings revealed that almost all APOE4 homozygotes exhibited AD pathology and had significantly higher levels of AD biomarkers from age 55 compared to APOE3 homozygotes. By age 65, nearly all had abnormal amyloid levels in cerebrospinal fluid, and 75% had positive amyloid scans, with the prevalence of these markers increasing with age, indicating near-full penetrance of AD biology in APOE4 homozygotes. The age of symptom onset was earlier in APOE4 homozygotes at 65.1, with a narrower 95% prediction interval than APOE3 homozygotes. The predictability of symptom onset and the sequence of biomarker changes in APOE4 homozygotes mirrored those in autosomal dominant AD and Down syndrome. However, in the dementia stage, there were no differences in amyloid or tau positron emission tomography across haplotypes, despite earlier clinical and biomarker changes. The study concludes that APOE4 homozygotes represent a genetic form of AD, suggesting the need for individualized prevention strategies, clinical trials and treatments.
APOE4 is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer disease. ApoE4 increases brain amyloid-b pathology relative to other ApoE isoforms. However, whether APOE independently influences tau pathology, the other major proteinopathy of Alzheimer disease and other tauopathies, or tau-mediated neurodegeneration, is not clear. By generating P301S tau transgenic mice on either a human ApoE knock-in (KI) or ApoE knockout (KO) background, here we show that P301S/E4 mice have significantly higher tau levels in the brain and a greater extent of somatodendritic tau redistribution by three months of age compared with P301S/E2, P301S/E3, and P301S/EKO mice. By nine months of age, P301S mice with different ApoE genotypes display distinct phosphorylated tau protein (p-tau) staining patterns. P301S/E4 mice develop markedly more brain atrophy and neuroinflammation than P301S/E2 and P301S/E3 mice, whereas P301S/EKO mice are largely protected from these changes. In vitro, E4-expressing microglia exhibit higher innate immune reactivity after lipopolysaccharide treatment. Co-culturing P301S tau-expressing neurons with E4-expressing mixed glia results in a significantly higher level of tumour-necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) secretion and markedly reduced neuronal viability compared with neuron/E2 and neuron/E3 co-cultures. Neurons co-cultured with EKO glia showed the greatest viability with the lowest level of secreted TNF-a. Treatment of P301S neurons with recombinant ApoE (E2, E3, E4) also leads to some neuronal damage and death compared with the absence of ApoE, with ApoE4 exacerbating the effect. In individuals with a sporadic primary tauopathy, the presence of an e4 allele is associated with more severe regional neurodegeneration. In individuals who are positive for amyloid-b pathology with symptomatic Alzheimer disease who usually have tau pathology, e4-carriers demonstrate greater rates of disease progression. Our results demonstrate that ApoE affects tau pathogenesis, neuroinflammation, and tau-mediated neurodegeneration independently of amyloid-b pathology. ApoE4 exerts a 'toxic' gain of function whereas the absence of ApoE is protective.
Neuroinflammation is a central mechanism involved in neurodegeneration as observed in Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most prevalent form of neurodegenerative disease. Apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4), the strongest genetic risk factor for AD, directly influences disease onset and progression by interacting with the major pathological hallmarks of AD including amyloid-b plaques, neurofibrillary tau tangles, as well as neuroinflammation. Microglia and astrocytes, the two major immune cells in the brain, exist in an immune-vigilant state providing immunological defense as well as housekeeping functions that promote neuronal well-being. It is becoming increasingly evident that under disease conditions, these immune cells become progressively dysfunctional in regulating metabolic and immunoregulatory pathways, thereby promoting chronic inflammation-induced neurodegeneration. Here, we review and discuss how APOE and specifically APOE4 directly influences amyloid-b and tau pathology, and disrupts microglial as well as astroglial immunomodulating functions leading to chronic inflammation that contributes to neurodegeneration in AD.
Vascular contributions to dementia and Alzheimer's disease are increasingly recognized1-6. Recent studies have suggested that breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) is an early biomarker of human cognitive dysfunction7, including the early clinical stages of Alzheimer's disease5,8-10. The E4 variant of apolipoprotein E (APOE4), the main susceptibility gene for Alzheimer's disease11-14, leads to accelerated breakdown of the BBB and degeneration of brain capillary pericytes15-19, which maintain BBB integrity20-22. It is unclear, however, whether the cerebrovascular effects of APOE4 contribute to cognitive impairment. Here we show that individuals bearing APOE4 (with the e3/e4 or e4/e4 alleles) are distinguished from those without APOE4 (e3/e3) by breakdown of the BBB in the hippocampus and medial temporal lobe. This finding is apparent in cognitively unimpaired APOE4 carriers and more severe in those with cognitive impairment, but is not related to amyloid-b or tau pathology measured in cerebrospinal fluid or by positron emission tomography23. High baseline levels of the BBB pericyte injury biomarker soluble PDGFRb7,8 in the cerebrospinal fluid predicted future cognitive decline in APOE4 carriers but not in non-carriers, even after controlling for amyloid-b and tau status, and were correlated with increased activity of the BBB-degrading cyclophilin A-matrix metalloproteinase-9 pathway19 in cerebrospinal fluid. Our findings suggest that breakdown of the BBB contributes to APOE4-associated cognitive decline independently of Alzheimer's disease pathology, and might be a therapeutic target in APOE4 carriers.
Human apolipoprotein E (ApoE) apolipoprotein is primarily expressed in three isoforms (ApoE2, ApoE3, and ApoE4) that differ only by two residues. ApoE4 constitutes the most important genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), ApoE3 is neutral, and ApoE2 is protective. How ApoE isoforms influence AD pathogenesis, however, remains unclear. Using ES-cell-derived human neurons, we show that ApoE secreted by glia stimulates neuronal Ab production with an ApoE4 > ApoE3 > ApoE2 potency rank order. We demonstrate that ApoE binding to ApoE receptors activates dual leucine-zipper kinase (DLK), a MAP-kinase kinase kinase that then activates MKK7 and ERK1/2 MAP kinases. Activated ERK1/2 induces cFos phosphorylation, stimulating the transcription factor AP-1, which in turn enhances transcription of amyloid-b precursor protein (APP) and thereby increases amyloid-b levels. This molecular mechanism also regulates APP transcription in mice in vivo. Our data describe a novel signal transduction pathway in neurons whereby ApoE activates a non-canonical MAP kinase cascade that enhances APP transcription and amyloid-b synthesis.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactorial neurodegenerative disorder that involves dysregulation of many cellular and molecular processes. It is notoriously difficult to develop therapeutics for AD due to its complex nature. Nevertheless, recent advancements in imaging technology and the development of innovative experimental techniques have allowed researchers to perform in-depth analyses to uncover the pathogenic mechanisms of AD. An important consideration when studying late-onset AD is its major genetic risk factor, apolipoprotein E4 (apoE4). Although the exact mechanisms underlying apoE4 effects on AD initiation and progression are not fully understood, recent studies have revealed critical insights into the apoE4-induced deficits that occur in AD. In this review, we highlight notable studies that detail apoE4 effects on prominent AD pathologies, including amyloid-b, tau pathology, neuroinflammation, and neural network dysfunction. We also discuss evidence that defines the physiological functions of apoE and outlines how these functions are disrupted in apoE4-related AD.
For the Alzheimer disease (AD) therapies to effectively attenuate clinical progression, it may be critical to intervene before the onset of amyloid-associated tau spreading, which drives neurodegeneration and cognitive decline. Time points at which amyloid-associated tau spreading accelerates may depend on individual risk factors, such as apolipoprotein E e4 (ApoE4) carriership, which is linked to faster disease progression; however, the association of ApoE4 with amyloid-related tau spreading is unclear. To assess if ApoE4 carriers show accelerated amyloid-related tau spreading and propose amyloid positron emission tomography (PET) thresholds at which tau spreading accelerates in ApoE4 carriers vs noncarriers. This cohort study including combined ApoE genotyping, amyloid PET, and longitudinal tau PET from 2 independent samples: the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI; n = 237; collected from April 2015 to August 2022) and Avid-A05 (n = 130; collected from December 2013 to July 2017) with a mean (SD) tau PET follow-up time of 1.9 (0.96) years in ADNI and 1.4 (0.23) years in Avid-A05. ADNI is an observational multicenter Alzheimer disease neuroimaging initiative and Avid-A05 an observational clinical trial. Participants classified as cognitively normal (152 in ADNI and 77 in Avid-A05) or mildly cognitively impaired (107 in ADNI and 53 in Avid-A05) were selected based on ApoE genotyping, amyloid-PET, and longitudinal tau PET data availability. Participants with ApoE e2/e4 genotype or classified as having dementia were excluded. Resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging connectivity templates were based on 42 healthy participants in ADNI. Mediation of amyloid PET on the association between ApoE4 status and subsequent tau PET increase through Braak stage regions and interaction between ApoE4 status and amyloid PET with annual tau PET increase through Braak stage regions and connectivity-based spreading stages (tau epicenter connectivity ranked regions). The mean (SD) age was 73.9 (7.35) years among the 237 ADNI participants and 70.2 (9.7) years among the 130 Avid-A05 participants. A total of 107 individuals in ADNI (45.1%) and 45 in Avid-A05 (34.6%) were ApoE4 carriers. Across both samples, we found that higher amyloid PET-mediated ApoE4-related tau PET increased globally (ADNI b, 0.15; 95% CI, 0.05-0.28; P = .001 and Avid-A05 b, 0.33; 95% CI, 0.14-0.54; P < .001) and in earlier Braak regions. Further, we found a significant association between ApoE4 status by amyloid PET interaction and annual tau PET increases consistently through early Braak- and connectivity-based stages where amyloid-related tau accumulation was accelerated in ApoE4carriers vs noncarriers at lower centiloid thresholds, corrected for age and sex. The findings in this study indicate that amyloid-related tau accumulation was accelerated in ApoE4 carriers at lower amyloid levels, suggesting that ApoE4 may facilitate earlier amyloid-driven tau spreading across connected brain regions. Possible therapeutic implications might be further investigated to determine when best to prevent tau spreading and thus cognitive decline depending on ApoE4 status.
The Apolipoprotein E e4 (ApoE e4) allele, encoding ApoE4, is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD). Emerging epidemiological evidence indicated that ApoE4 contributes to AD through influencing b-amyloid (Ab) deposition and clearance. However, the molecular mechanisms of ApoE4 involved in AD pathogenesis remains unclear. Here, we introduced the structure and functions of ApoE isoforms, and then we reviewed the potential mechanisms of ApoE4 in the AD pathogenesis, including the effect of ApoE4 on Ab pathology, and tau phosphorylation, oxidative stress; synaptic function, cholesterol transport, and mitochondrial dysfunction; sleep disturbances and cerebrovascular integrity in the AD brains. Furthermore, we discussed the available strategies for AD treatments that target to ApoE4. In general, this review overviews the potential roles of ApoE4 in the AD development and suggests some therapeutic approaches for AD. ApoE4 is genetic risk of AD. ApoE4 is involved in the AD pathogenesis. Ab deposition, NFT, oxidative stress, abnormal cholesterol, mitochondrial dysfunction and neuroinflammation could be observed in the brains with ApoE4. Targeting the interaction of ApoE4 with the AD pathology is available strategy for AD treatments.
Microglial involvement in Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology has emerged as a risk-determining pathogenic event. While apolipoprotein E (APOE) is known to modify AD risk, it remains unclear how microglial apoE impacts brain cognition and AD pathology. Here, using conditional mouse models expressing apoE isoforms in microglia and central nervous system-associated macrophages (CAMs), we demonstrate a cell-autonomous effect of apoE3-mediated microglial activation and function, which are negated by apoE4. Expression of apoE3 in microglia/CAMs improves cognitive function, increases microglia surrounding amyloid plaque and reduces amyloid pathology and associated toxicity, whereas apoE4 expression either compromises or has no effects on these outcomes by impairing lipid metabolism. Single-cell transcriptomic profiling reveals increased antigen presentation and interferon pathways upon apoE3 expression. In contrast, apoE4 expression downregulates complement and lysosomal pathways, and promotes stress-related responses. Moreover, in the presence of mouse endogenous apoE, microglial apoE4 exacerbates amyloid pathology. Finally, we observed a reduction in Lgals3-positive responsive microglia surrounding amyloid plaque and an increased accumulation of lipid droplets in APOE4 human brains and induced pluripotent stem cell-derived microglia. Our findings establish critical isoform-dependent effects of microglia/CAM-expressed apoE in brain function and the development of amyloid pathology, providing new insight into how apoE4 vastly increases AD risk.
APOE4 is the strongest genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), with increased odds ratios in female carriers. Targeting amyloid plaques shows modest improvement in male non-APOE4 carriers. Leveraging single-cell transcriptomics across APOE variants in both sexes, multiplex flow cytometry and validation in two independent cohorts of APOE4 female carriers with AD, we identify a new subset of neutrophils interacting with microglia associated with cognitive impairment. This phenotype is defined by increased interleukin (IL)-17 and IL-1 coexpressed gene modules in blood neutrophils and in microglia of cognitively impaired female APOE e4 carriers, showing increased infiltration to the AD brain. APOE4 female IL-17+ neutrophils upregulated the immunosuppressive cytokines IL-10 and TGFb and immune checkpoints, including LAG3 and PD-1, associated with accelerated immune aging. Deletion of APOE4 in neutrophils reduced this immunosuppressive phenotype and restored the microglial response to neurodegeneration, limiting plaque pathology in AD mice. Mechanistically, IL-17F upregulated in APOE4 neutrophils interacts with microglial IL-17RA to suppress the induction of the neurodegenerative phenotype, and blocking this axis supported cognitive improvement in AD mice. These findings provide a translational basis to target IL-17F in APOE e4 female carriers with cognitive impairment.
The e4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene, a genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease, is abundantly expressed in both the brain and periphery. Here, we present evidence that peripheral apoE isoforms, separated from those in the brain by the blood-brain barrier, differentially impact Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis and cognition. To evaluate the function of peripheral apoE, we developed conditional mouse models expressing human APOE3 or APOE4 in the liver with no detectable apoE in the brain. Liver-expressed apoE4 compromised synaptic plasticity and cognition by impairing cerebrovascular functions. Plasma proteome profiling revealed apoE isoform-dependent functional pathways highlighting cell adhesion, lipoprotein metabolism and complement activation. ApoE3 plasma from young mice improved cognition and reduced vessel-associated gliosis when transfused into aged mice, whereas apoE4 compromised the beneficial effects of young plasma. A human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived endothelial cell model recapitulated the plasma apoE isoform-specific effect on endothelial integrity, further supporting a vascular-related mechanism. Upon breeding with amyloid model mice, liver-expressed apoE4 exacerbated brain amyloid pathology, whereas apoE3 reduced it. Our findings demonstrate pathogenic effects of peripheral apoE4, providing a strong rationale for targeting peripheral apoE to treat Alzheimer's disease.
Patient-specific, human-based cellular models integrating a biomimetic blood-brain barrier (BBB), immune, and myelinated neuron components are critically needed to enable accelerated, translationally relevant discovery of neurological disease mechanisms and interventions. By engineering a novel brain-mimicking 3D hydrogel and co-culturing all six major brain cell types derived from patient iPSCs, we have constructed, characterized, and utilized a multicellular integrated brain (miBrain) immuno-glial-neurovascular model with in vivo- like hallmarks inclusive of neuronal activity, functional connectivity, barrier function, myelin-producing oligodendrocyte engagement with neurons, multicellular interactions, and transcriptomic profiles. We implemented the model to study Alzheimer's Disease pathologies associated with APOE4 genetic risk. APOE4 miBrains differentially exhibit amyloid aggregation, tau phosphorylation, and astrocytic GFAP. Unlike the co-emergent fate specification of glia and neurons in organoids, miBrains integrate independently differentiated cell types, a feature we harnessed to identify that APOE4 in astrocytes promotes neuronal tau pathogenesis and dysregulation through crosstalk with microglia.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive and synaptic failure disease. Despite the many years of research, AD still harbors many secrets. As more of the world's population grows older, researchers are striving to find greater information on disease progression and pathogenesis. Identifying and treating the markers of this disease, or better yet, preventing it all together, are the hopes of those investing in this field of study. Several years of research revealed that synaptic pathology and mitochondrial oxidative damage are early events in disease progression. Loss of synapses and synaptic damage are the best correlates of cognitive deficits found in AD patients. As the disease progresses, there are significant changes at the synapse. These changes can both shed greater light onto the progression of the disease and serve as markers and therapeutic targets. This article addresses the mechanisms of synaptic action, mitochondrial regulation/dysregulation, resulting synaptic changes caused by amyloid beta and phosphorylated tau in AD progression. This article also highlights recent developments of risk factors, genetics and ApoE4 involvement, factors related to synaptic damage and loss, mislocalization of amyloid beta and phosphorylated tau, mitophagy, microglial activation and synapse-based therapies in AD. Furthermore, impairments in LTD and reactivation of microglia are discussed.
The APOE4 allele is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). The contribution of microglial APOE4 to AD pathogenesis is unknown, although APOE has the most enriched gene expression in neurodegenerative microglia (MGnD). Here, we show in mice and humans a negative role of microglial APOE4 in the induction of the MGnD response to neurodegeneration. Deletion of microglial APOE4 restores the MGnD phenotype associated with neuroprotection in P301S tau transgenic mice and decreases pathology in APP/PS1 mice. MGnD-astrocyte cross-talk associated with b-amyloid (Ab) plaque encapsulation and clearance are mediated via LGALS3 signaling following microglial APOE4 deletion. In the brains of AD donors carrying the APOE4 allele, we found a sex-dependent reciprocal induction of AD risk factors associated with suppression of MGnD genes in females, including LGALS3, compared to individuals homozygous for the APOE3 allele. Mechanistically, APOE4-mediated induction of ITGB8-transforming growth factor-b (TGFb) signaling impairs the MGnD response via upregulation of microglial homeostatic checkpoints, including Inpp5d, in mice. Deletion of Inpp5d in microglia restores MGnD-astrocyte cross-talk and facilitates plaque clearance in APP/PS1 mice. We identify the microglial APOE4-ITGB8-TGFb pathway as a negative regulator of microglial response to AD pathology, and restoring the MGnD phenotype via blocking ITGB8-TGFb signaling provides a promising therapeutic intervention for AD.
One of the key pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer disease (AD) is the accumulation of the amyloid-b (Ab) peptide into amyloid plaques. The apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the strongest genetic risk factor for late-onset AD and has been shown to influence the accumulation of Ab in the brain in an isoform-dependent manner. ApoE can be produced by different cell types in the brain, with astrocytes being the largest producer of apoE, although reactive microglia also express high levels of apoE. While studies have shown that altering apoE levels in the brain can influence the development of Ab plaque pathology, it is not fully known how apoE produced by specific cell types, such as astrocytes, contributes to amyloid pathology. We utilized APOE knock-in mice capable of having APOE selectively removed from astrocytes in a tamoxifen-inducible manner and crossed them with the APP/PS1-21 mouse model of amyloidosis. We analyzed the changes to Ab plaque levels and assessed the impact on cellular responses to Ab plaques when astrocytic APOE is removed. Tamoxifen administration was capable of strongly reducing apoE levels in the brain by markedly reducing astrocyte apoE, while microglial apoE expression remained. Reduction of astrocytic apoE3 and apoE4 led to a large decrease in Ab plaque deposition and less compact plaques. While overall Iba1+ microglia were unchanged in the cortex after reducing astrocyte apoE, the expression of the disease-associated microglial markers Clec7a and apoE were lower around amyloid plaques, indicating decreased microglial activation. Additionally, astrocyte GFAP levels are unchanged around amyloid plaques, but overall GFAP levels are reduced in the cortex of female apoE4 mice after a reduction in astrocytic apoE. Finally, while the amount of neuritic dystrophy around remaining individual plaques was increased with the removal of astrocytic apoE, the overall amount of cortical amyloid-associated neuritic dystrophy was significantly decreased. This study reveals an important role of astrocytic apoE3 and apoE4 on the deposition and accumulation of Ab plaques as well as on certain Ab-associated downstream effects.
Gene expression is dysregulated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, both in peripheral blood and post mortem brain. We investigated peripheral whole-blood gene (co)expression to determine molecular changes prior to symptom onset. RNA was extracted and sequenced for 65 cognitively healthy F-PACK participants (65 (56-80) years, 34 APOE4 non-carriers, 31 APOE4 carriers), at baseline and follow-up (interval: 5.0 (3.4-8.6) years). Participants received amyloid PET at both time points and amyloid rate of change derived. Accumulators were defined with rate of change >= 2.19 Centiloids. We performed differential gene expression and weighted gene co-expression network analysis to identify differentially expressed genes and networks of co-expressed genes, respectively, with respect to traits of interest (APOE4 status, amyloid accumulation (binary/continuous)), and amyloid positivity status, followed by Gene Ontology annotation. There were 166 significant differentially expressed genes at follow-up compared to baseline in APOE4 carriers only, whereas 12 significant differentially expressed genes were found only in APOE4 non-carriers, over time. Among the significant genes in APOE4 carriers, several had strong evidence for a pathogenic role in AD based on direct association scores generated from the DISQOVER platform: NGRN, IGF2, GMPR, CLDN5, SMIM24. Top enrichment terms showed upregulated mitochondrial and metabolic pathways, and an exacerbated upregulation of ribosomal pathways in APOE4 carriers compared to non-carriers. Similarly, there were 33 unique significant differentially expressed genes at follow-up compared to baseline in individuals classified as amyloid negative at baseline and positive at follow-up or amyloid positive at both time points and 32 unique significant differentially expressed genes over time in individuals amyloid negative at both time points. Among the significant genes in the first group, the top five with the highest direct association scores were as follows: RPL17-C18orf32, HSP90AA1, MBP, SIRPB1, and GRINA. Top enrichment terms included upregulated metabolism and focal adhesion pathways. Baseline and follow-up gene co-expression networks were separately built. Seventeen baseline co-expression modules were derived, with one significantly negatively associated with amyloid accumulator status (r2 = - 0.25, p = 0.046). This was enriched for proteasomal protein catabolic process and myeloid cell development. Thirty-two follow-up modules were derived, with two significantly associated with APOE4 status: one downregulated (r2 = - 0.27, p = 0.035) and one upregulated (r2 = 0.26, p = 0.039) module. Top enrichment processes for the downregulated module included proteasomal protein catabolic process and myeloid cell homeostasis. Top enrichment processes for the upregulated module included cytoplasmic translation and rRNA processing. We show that there are longitudinal gene expression changes that implicate a disrupted immune system, protein removal, and metabolism in cognitively intact individuals who carry APOE4 or who accumulate in cortical amyloid. This provides insight into the pathophysiology of AD, whilst providing novel targets for drug and therapeutic development.
Circulating immune cells contribute to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but their role is poorly understood. Rosenzweig et al. recently identified a subset of interleukin (IL)-17+ neutrophils that inhibit neuroprotective microglia in female APOE4 carriers. Blockade of IL-17 signaling or APOE4 deletion in neutrophils restored microglial responses and reduced murine amyloid pathology.
In Alzheimer's disease, amyloid deposits along the brain vasculature lead to a condition known as cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), which impairs blood-brain barrier (BBB) function and accelerates cognitive degeneration. Apolipoprotein (APOE4) is the strongest risk factor for CAA, yet the mechanisms underlying this genetic susceptibility are unknown. Here we developed an induced pluripotent stem cell-based three-dimensional model that recapitulates anatomical and physiological properties of the human BBB in vitro. Similarly to CAA, our in vitro BBB displayed significantly more amyloid accumulation in APOE4 compared to APOE3. Combinatorial experiments revealed that dysregulation of calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) signaling and APOE in pericyte-like mural cells induces APOE4-associated CAA pathology. In the human brain, APOE and NFAT are selectively dysregulated in pericytes of APOE4 carriers, and inhibition of calcineurin-NFAT signaling reduces APOE4-associated CAA pathology in vitro and in vivo. Our study reveals the role of pericytes in APOE4-mediated CAA and highlights calcineurin-NFAT signaling as a therapeutic target in CAA and Alzheimer's disease.
Apolipoprotein (apo) E4, being a major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), is actively involved in the proteolytic processing of amyloid precursor protein (APP) to amyloid b (Ab) peptide, the principle constituent of amyloid plaques in Alzheimer Disease (AD) patients. ApoE4 is believed to affect APP processing through intracellular cholesterol homeostasis, whereas lowering the cholesterol level by pharmacological agents has been suggested to reduce Ab production. This study has investigated the effects of hypolipidemic agents fenofibrate, and the flavonoids-naringenin and diosmetin-on apoE4-induced APP processing in rat neuroblastoma cells stably transfected with human wild-type APP 695 (B103-hAPP695wt). B103-hAPP695wt cells were pretreated with different doses of flavonoids and fenofibrate for 1 h prior to apoE4 exposure for 24 h. ApoE4-induced production of intra- and extracellular Ab peptides has been reduced with fenofibrate, naringenin, and diosmetin treatments. Pretreatment with diosmetin has significantly reduced apoE4-induced full-length APP (fl- APP) expression, whereas naringenin and fenofibrate had no effect on it. In addition, the increase in the apoE4-induced secretion of sAPPtotal and sAPPa has been dose-dependently reduced with drug pretreatment. On the other hand, the decrease in the expression of both APP-carboxy terminal fragments (CTF)-a and -b (generated by the a- or b-secretase cleavage of APP) by apoE4 was dose-dependently increased in cells pretreated with fenofibrate and naringenin but not diosmetin. Thus, we suggest that fenofibrate, naringenin, and diosmetin treatments can reduce apoE4- induced Ab production by distinct mechanisms that may prove useful in developing drugs for AD patients.
The correlations between apolipoprotein epsilon 4 (APOE4) status and regional amyloid, tau, and cortical thickness in cognitively normal elderly are not fully understood. Our cross-sectional study aimed to compare regional amyloid/tau burden, and cortical thickness according to APOE4 carrier status and assess correlations between APOE4 and Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related biomarker burdens. We analyzed 185 cognitively normal participants from the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. Participants aged 55-90 with normal cognitive function were divided into amyloid ss-positive (Ass+) APOE4 carriers (group 1, n = 27), Ass+ APOE4 non-carriers (group 2, n = 29), and Ass- normal controls (group 0, n = 129). We compared amyloid depositions, tau depositions, and cortical thickness among the three groups and assessed correlations between APOE4 existence and imaging biomarkers adjusted for age and sex. The participants in group 2 were older than those in the other groups. The regional amyloid/tau standardized uptake value ratios (SUVRs) did not differ between groups 1 and 2, but the amyloid/tau SUVRs in most regions were numerically higher after adjusting for age difference. APOE4 allele had robust correlations with increased amyloid burden in the fronto-temporo-parietal cortical areas after adjustment for age and sex, but it had weaker and mixed correlations with the regional tau burden and did not have significant correlation with cortical thickness. We identified that the presence of APOE4 allele might be more highly associated with amyloid deposition than with other AD-related biomarkers such as tau or cortical thickness in cognitively normal elderly.
In light of advancements in machine learning techniques, many studies have implemented machine learning approaches combined with data measures to predict and classify Alzheimer's disease. Studies that predicted cognitive status with longitudinal follow-up of amyloid-positive individuals remain scarce, however. We developed models based on voxel-wise functional connectivity (FC) density mapping and the presence of the ApoE4 genotype to predict whether amyloid-positive individuals would experience cognitive decline after 1 year. We divided 122 participants into cognitive decline and stable cognition groups based on the participants' change rates in Mini-Mental State Examination scores. In addition, we included 68 participants from Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) database as an external validation data set. Subsequently, we developed two classification models: the first model included 99 voxels, and the second model included 99 voxels and the ApoE4 genotype as features to train the models by Wide Neural Network algorithm with fivefold cross-validation and to predict the classes in the hold-out test and ADNI data sets. The results revealed that both models demonstrated high accuracy in classifying the two groups in the hold-out test data set. The model for FC demonstrated good performance, with a mean F 1-score of 0.86. The model for FC combined with the ApoE4 genotype achieved superior performance, with a mean F 1-score of 0.90. In the ADNI data set, the two models demonstrated stable performances, with mean F 1-scores of 0.77 in the first and second models. Our findings suggest that the proposed models exhibited promising accuracy for predicting cognitive status after 1 year in amyloid-positive individuals. Notably, the combination of FC and the ApoE4 genotype increased prediction accuracy. These findings can assist clinicians in predicting changes in cognitive status in individuals with a high risk of Alzheimer's disease and can assist future studies in developing precise treatment and prevention strategies.
The major genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), APOE4, accelerates beta-amyloid (Ab) plaque formation, but whether this is caused by APOE expressed in microglia or astrocytes is debated. We express here the human APOE isoforms in astrocytes in an Apoe-deficient AD mouse model. This is not only sufficient to restore the amyloid plaque pathology but also induces the characteristic transcriptional pathological responses in Apoe-deficient microglia surrounding the plaques. We find that both APOE4 and the protective APOE2 from astrocytes increase fibrillar plaque deposition, but differentially affect soluble Ab aggregates. Microglia and astrocytes show specific alterations in function of APOE genotype expressed in astrocytes. Our experiments indicate a central role of the astrocytes in APOE mediated amyloid plaque pathology and in the induction of associated microglia responses.
The apolipoprotein E (APOE) gene is the strongest genetic risk modifier for Alzheimer's disease (AD), with the APOE4 allele increasing risk and APOE2 decreasing it compared with the common APOE3 allele. Using single-nucleus RNA sequencing of the temporal cortex from APOE2 carriers, APOE3 homozygotes, and APOE4 carriers, we found that AD-associated transcriptomic changes were highly APOE genotype dependent. Comparing AD with controls, APOE2 carriers showed upregulated synaptic and myelination-related pathways, preserving synapses and myelination at the protein level. Conversely, these pathways were downregulated in APOE3 homozygotes, resulting in reduced synaptic and myelination proteins. In APOE4 carriers, excitatory neurons displayed reduced synaptic pathways similar to APOE3, but oligodendrocytes showed upregulated myelination pathways like APOE2. However, their synaptic and myelination protein levels remained unchanged or increased. APOE4 carriers also showed increased pro-inflammatory signatures in microglia but reduced responses to amyloid-b pathology. These findings reveal APOE genotype-specific molecular alterations in AD across cell types.
Apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4), the main susceptibility gene for Alzheimer's disease (AD), leads to vascular dysfunction, amyloid-b pathology, neurodegeneration and dementia. How these different pathologies contribute to advanced-stage AD remains unclear. Using aged APOE knock-in mice crossed with 5xFAD mice, we show that, compared to APOE3, APOE4 accelerates blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown, loss of cerebral blood flow, neuronal loss and behavioral deficits independently of amyloid-b. BBB breakdown was associated with activation of the cyclophilin A-matrix metalloproteinase-9 BBB-degrading pathway in pericytes. Suppression of this pathway improved BBB integrity and prevented further neuronal loss and behavioral deficits in APOE4;5FAD mice while having no effect on amyloid-b pathology. Thus, APOE4 accelerates advanced-stage BBB breakdown and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's mice via the cyclophilin A pathway in pericytes independently of amyloid-b, which has implication for the pathogenesis and treatment of vascular and neurodegenerative disorder in AD.
Efforts to develop drugs for Alzheimer's disease (AD) have shown promise in animal studies, only to fail in human trials, suggesting a pressing need to study AD in human model systems. Using human neurons derived from induced pluripotent stem cells that expressed apolipoprotein E4 (ApoE4), a variant of the APOE gene product and the major genetic risk factor for AD, we demonstrated that ApoE4-expressing neurons had higher levels of tau phosphorylation, unrelated to their increased production of amyloid-b (Ab) peptides, and that they displayed GABAergic neuron degeneration. ApoE4 increased Ab production in human, but not in mouse, neurons. Converting ApoE4 to ApoE3 by gene editing rescued these phenotypes, indicating the specific effects of ApoE4. Neurons that lacked APOE behaved similarly to those expressing ApoE3, and the introduction of ApoE4 expression recapitulated the pathological phenotypes, suggesting a gain of toxic effects from ApoE4. Treatment of ApoE4-expressing neurons with a small-molecule structure corrector ameliorated the detrimental effects, thus showing that correcting the pathogenic conformation of ApoE4 is a viable therapeutic approach for ApoE4-related AD.
